The Trump administration immediately
after the cold-blooded killing of a
protester called it domestic terrorism.
We know what happened to her because it
was documented by citizens. Facts
matter.
>> Laura, [music]
Oscarinning filmmaker whose latest work
is about one of America's best known
journalists, Seymour Hirs. Did you see
him as a kindred spirit?
>> I think we're both looking for the truth
and sometimes that gets us on the bad
side of the US government. You know,
it's a dark time, but we can't just lay
down and feel in despair. We have press
freedom in our constitution. We have the
right to be critical of government. It's
not illegal. From Bloomberg [music]
Weekend, this is the Michelle Hussein
Show. [music]
These past days have been searing for
many Americans. A second person shot
dead by federal agents in Minneapolis in
just over two weeks. Both Alex Prey and
Renee Good [music] were labeled domestic
terrorists. And the conversation you're
about to hear is with someone who knows
what it's like to be seen as a security
threat by her own government. Laura is a
filmmaker who says that her work after
9/11 saw her being placed on a US
terrorist watch list. You'll hear her
tell that story to [music] me and the
detail of it I found shocking, what it
meant for [music] her life, how she
ended up leaving the United States. Now,
several of her films have been about
individuals of controversy or courage.
Nan Golden who campaigned on the opioid
scandal, the whistleblower Edward
Snowden, the Wikileaks [music]
founder Julian Assange. In our
conversation, you'll [music] hear her on
today's citizen journalists, people like
those who've documented violence [music]
in Minneapolis. And unusually, I ended
up going back to her to talk again after
the news of Alex Prety's [music] death,
which of course made me think again
about her words. First though, her
latest film, which has just been
nominated for a BAFTA. It's called
Coverup. You'll find it on Netflix and
it's the story of one of America's most
famous journalists, Seymour Hirs, who
spent his whole life documenting power
and the abuse of power. Not in fact,
unlike Laura herself.
He's a legend in investigative
journalism in the United States. He's
exposed, you know, really dark secrets
and and hidden truths about this
country. And his first really big story
which he received a Pulit surprise for
was a story about the massacre in Mai
where the US military went in and killed
an entire village in cold blood and they
were civilians including children and
and babies actually and over 500
civilians were murdered and it was a
story that Cybroke as a as a freelancer
that's one of the interesting things
about it. He was at the AP. He was
reporting on the Pentagon. People
started to say things to him like
Vietnam was murder incorporated. He
started to hear some really disturbing
things and he just got a tip that there
was going to be a court marshal of a
soldier William Kelly and he tracks him
down and through tracking him down goes
on a very long journey to expose a
horrible atrocity and also that it's not
isolated. So this was, you know, um his
his first big story
>> and you show this early in coverup.
>> In the film, we put it very early
because we wanted the film to really be
about we're sort of diving in as it's
moving fast. But Sai fell in love with
journalism in Chicago. He began as a
copy boy and then was sort of worked his
way up in the AP covered civil rights
and then was transferred to um
Washington. You show how even before
uncovering mi he's working on
uncomfortable truths like the US
biological weapons program and he has an
impact in that program coming to an end.
>> It's a very clever use of archive and
Seymour Hirsh himself talking to you.
Yeah. Uh, I mean, the film begins with
this very um notorious incident um
called the Dougway sheep incident where
6,000 sheep die when the US military
were testing nerve agents in the air and
they flew too high and the nerve agent
fell down and killed the sheep and then
the US military first denies it and side
publishes about that that story. So in
terms of the archival when I began the
film the first question before I could
commit to making the film is will we
have the archival to tell the story
because I I come from a cinema
background and I I need to have the
materials to to have the story unfold in
a cinematic way. Yeah. Otherwise without
the archive it's a lot of talking heads
which is which is not great from a
visual point of view.
>> Yeah. because we had this extraordinary
um archival material that allows it
allows it to unfold with with images.
>> You're you're of course a younger
generation than him, Laura. You do have
something in common and that you've both
won Pulit surprises for your work. I
also wondered if the key moment in
history that you have in common is the
Iraq war because much more recently than
Vietnam, Sih does incredible work
uncovering the torture of prisoners at
Abu Graay prison in Iraq and I think you
were working on Iraq at the same time.
>> Exactly. Yeah. I mean I'd known Sai's
stories. is I I I and I knew of his
work, but I I he wasn't he was really
became on my radar in the years after
the 9/11 attacks where he was asking
very hard questions. Why are we going to
Iraq? What is the connection between the
oil and the money and what is the
connection between the neocons and the
Hallebertton and all all these defense
contractors? So I in 2003 decided that I
was going to make a a film in Iraq. So I
was preparing to go and in the spring of
2004, Sai publishes the the evidence of
of torture of prisoners in Abu Grae and
which was in the New Yorker at that
time. I went to Iraq right after that
and made a film there. I was there for
eight months and followed an Iraqi
family actually met the doctor at Abu
Grey prison. And I talked my way into to
documenting the prison after Sai's
photos. And then I came back to the US
and I called Sai and I said, you know,
would you I'd like to make a film about
you and and and about your work and
about investigative journalism. And it
was motivated by a sense that I felt the
public, the US public was being failed
by our legacy media in its coverage of
the quote unquote war on terror which
includes Guantanamo Bay prison, the Iraq
war, secret um rendition sites and and
torture. And so I really felt that the
press kind of stood back and I think
repeated the government's talking points
and Sai wasn't doing that and he's never
done that. And yet
everyone picked up on that story, right?
It was his words. It was also the
searing images and it became very clear
early on and was widely acknowledged
early on that this was appalling
inhumane treatment of prisoners.
>> Yes. So both in the instance of of Milai
first there was a phase in Mil in Mili
of the press denying it and then the
images came out and everyone had to
agree that this was you know an atrocity
and with with Abu Cra we also show how
you know Sai got its first tip on it and
then this producer at 60 Minutes and 60
Minutes was sitting on the story because
the because of government pressure. The
government was saying do not publish
these this evidence of torture which of
course for Sih was antithetical to what
you're supposed to do as journalists and
he actually forced their hand to publish
and then of course it was global news
because it was you know so disturbing to
see the systemic use of torture and Sai
really didn't just stop at exposing the
torture but looking at how it was a you
know came from the top. Did you see him
as a kindred spirit that you
>> obviously cared about things that you
knew he also must care about from the
work that he was doing?
>> The answer is yes. I mean I think we're
both looking for the truth wherever it
takes us without sort of fear or favor,
right? I mean and sometimes that gets us
um on the um bad side of the US
government and we've both done that. Um
and so I think he respected my work. I
of course respected his work but you
know documentaries different from
journalism but all of my films are
really looking at you know people who
are you know um bringing forth
information that it shifts I think our
consciousness it's not just he's not an
opinion journalist right his best work
is fact-based it's fact-based and it
often leads to you know very dark truths
about what's happening in this country
about levels of deception and and we
were interested or I was interested as a
filmmaker is how what is the connection
between
MI and Abu Grae and today in Gaza, you
know, and what are these cycles of
violence and atrocities
and lies and and deception, cover-ups
and and impunity really. I mean, because
I I actually really think that the
problem
or one of the solutions to sort of end
these cycles is to end the cycle of
impunity.
>> He has been wrong sometimes. Seymour
Hirs has he didn't believe that Bashar
Assad had used chemical weapons against
his own people.
>> It's not about whether Bashar Assad is a
good guy or a bad guy, but this whole
business that goes on with we know he
used Sarin.
>> He was taken in by fake documents about
JFK and Marilyn Monroe. He's been
criticized as well for often using
single sources and unnamed single
sources.
>> And obviously we needed to include those
stories in the film, right? That people
get people make mistakes. Journalists
make mistakes. It's very hard to do to
know who to trust. So we we did include
those stories. In terms of the with the
Syria, I mean, I have friends who were
tortured in Syria. I mean, I it it's not
journalism that I would defend. Um, in
terms of uh the JFK reporting, he
actually never published the forgeries.
He did fall for them for a while, but he
he he caught them before they were
published. So, yes, it was a big
scandal, but it wasn't that he
published, you know, wrong information,
but but yeah, I mean, the truth is is
that sources always have motivations. We
don't know what they are. We don't know
if the motivations are because they've
seen something wrong because they're
they have an agenda. They have they
don't have the full context. And I think
Sai wasn't always that comfortable when
we were asking about those stories. But
I think he also respected us. I mean, we
had to and particularly because as you
said before, people would assume that S
Hersh and I do have some political, you
know, agreement. So, we also had to talk
about where we disagreed.
>> Yeah. and he acknowledges to you that he
was wrong over the Assad reporting and
you put to him that he was too close to
Assad himself because he'd met him a few
times and and he acknowledges that. I
think there there are other really
uncomfortable moments which are to do
with him himself like he said yes to
being the subject of a film after a long
time of you asking him,
>> but then he gets really uncomfortable
and in fact like tries to call it off or
does call it off in the middle of
filming. you know too much about what
I'm doing, so I'd like to quit.
>> Maybe we should cut.
>> Well, no, no, let's just quit it.
>> As you said, you know, I first asked him
in 2005 and we sat down, you know, we
began production in 23, so it took a
little while for him to warm up to the
idea, but I have to say it was very hard
for him. At the same time, he was so he
was very committed to the process. Like
he never turned away from a question.
Some questions are hard for him
certainly if it's about a source and not
we weren't actually ever asking him
about specific sources we were asking
about how do sort how does it work how
do you build trust um so he was he was
very generous even when uncomfortable
you know and I think for him certain
things like why do you do what you do is
a question that he's not good at
answering it's not that he doesn't he's
[snorts] withholding the answer it's
just not he's not the best at answering
that and yeah he did quit the film
>> he lets you see boxes and boxes of
documents and there are names in those
documents and when
>> he's filming with them, it clearly makes
him understandably uncomfortable
>> thinking about the people who might
still be alive and whose names are on
camera as far as he knows.
>> Totally. I mean, you know, you're a
journalist as well. if somebody was sort
of you know looking at your notes. I
mean I think it did make him
uncomfortable just even though he
trusted us and we had made it you know
we agreed at the beginning that we had
an obligation to protect his sources as
filmmakers. My reputation on source
protection [snorts] is very good. So he
but what had happened when he quit the
film was there was a couple of notebooks
that he thought he had separated and
they had gotten mixed in. But you know
he quit and it took about a weekend and
and then he was back and as he was
quitting of course it was very tense but
uh but we felt confident that he would
come back because he's known for being
volatile.
>> Was it a weekend of frantic calls? Like
how hard did you have to work? You've
invested a lot like you've waited 18
years for him to say yes to the film and
then he basically pulls the plug halfway
through.
>> Yeah, we were about a year in deep. We
were deep in. I have a co-director Mark
Openhouse. I was sort of the recipient
of Sai's anger that day. Mark went and
who's known Sai for a long time went to
his house that night. Liz, his wife, who
has, you know, they've been together, as
you learn in the film, for over 60
years, I think she said, "Sorry, you're
not going to quit the film." I mean, so
it took, you know, it took it took some
time, but it was a tense day. It was I
mean, he wasn't, you know, wasn't
pretending. It was he was seriously I
think you know what I love about Sai and
why Sai for me as a filmmaker I like his
resistance you know like I I think as a
documentary filmmaker you should be
really um suspicious of somebody who
would be eager to have a film made about
them and and I like that he's very um
upfront about what he's feeling in the
moment right some people would like
smile and then you know maybe leave a
message and say I'm thinking about
quitting you know you know science says
it on camera
>> and you did get him to talk about
himself and I was really interested in
the details about his background, the
fact that he doesn't come from
privilege, his parents did not expect
anything of him in educational terms and
also the fact that for someone whose
father was a Jewish refugee came to the
United States with virtually nothing in
1920, his father's family is later
massacred
by the Nazis in Lithuania. And yet Sai
doesn't never in his father's lifetime
ask so many questions about having such
a an extraordinary personal history
himself right I mean his mother comes
from Poland you know Yiddish in the
house um you know had very little and
his dad had a dry cleaning store and and
Sai had a you know a talent you know
with people so he was working at the
store and his dad got sick with lung
cancer and you know Sai talks about
there being a lot of silence in the
family never hearing about the
Holocaust, never learning what happened
to the community that his father's from.
Um, learning about the world through the
book of the, you know, signing up as a
young boy to the book of the month club.
Nobody was saying, "Huh, maybe this kid
is bright. Maybe, you know, we should,
you know, think about where he should be
going to college." And, you know, his
dad told him that, you know, he didn't
need college because his dad knew that
he was sick. And so, Sai saw the world.
The store was in the south side of
Chicago. He saw inequality. He saw
racism. He saw how the world worked and
I think that that informs his distrust
of power and skepticism around power.
>> I wonder if another thing you two have
in common is that you could both be
accused by some people of focusing too
much on the ills of your own country
that your lens is often turned on
America and America's abuse of of power
whether internationally or or
domestically.
Why is that your dominant focus through
so much of your work?
>> One of the things about this film,
besides reporting at its best, it's
fact-based. And so, and he says in the
film at some point, it doesn't matter
what I believe, it matters what I can
prove. I mean, I think we should all
focus on the the cultures that we know.
And we, you know, that I I don't think
it's my role to make work in cultures
that I don't understand or don't know.
And and you know, the US is a global
power. And I think there's a myth of
American exceptionalism that needs to be
I think undone because you know here we
are you know I mean what look what's
happened in Venezuela those are the
actions of empires right you know since
watching coverup I've been thinking a
lot about the films you made and you
made a trilogy of films after 9/11 about
the occupation of Iraq one about
Guantanamo Bay one about Edward Snowden
who I'm sure we'll talk about but then
recent events made me think
how perhaps we are living in a very
similar post 911 world now in that that
war in Iraq was the war outside the
international order and outside the UN
and what we've seen with Maduro in
Venezuela also takes us into a a realm
outside what we've come to see as normal
rules. Yeah, I mean I agree with you
absolutely and I have a similar feeling
of like dread and and um anxiety that
about what the US is doing about what
will be the long-term consequences of
these actions. Regime change never works
out well. Even if you're talking about a
dictator who's hated and you know I mean
I had experience in Iraq there was no
love for Saddam Hussein but people don't
want to be occupied. People want
self-determination. They don't want to
be run by the United States. this is
just basic. So this idea that we're
going back to this sort of regime change
foreign policy is is terrifying to me,
you know, and what's also terrifying is
[snorts]
yeah, for me I'm I'm just going to say
the failure of legacy media. I don't
think you know there was there were
these stories after the kidnapping or
extrajudicial you know rendition
whatever we want to call it of Maduro
and and the the news reports in you know
the times the New York Times were things
where's a Tik Tok of how the CIA you
know how they were able to sneak in and
I just don't think it's news that the
CIA is capable of kidnapping anyone on
the planet. What I what I think we
should be asking is why are we doing
this and what is the what are the really
long histories and negative consequences
of these kind of foreign interventions.
I think those are the questions we need
to ask.
>> But the administration of course would
say we are acting in the US's national
interest because we don't want
Venezuela's resources used by China or
Russia.
>> The US doesn't have the right to steal
resources from other countries. I mean,
I just think that the action of regime
change, I think it's against
international law. I mean, I I'm not
going to defend it. They pose no threat.
>> Is that what you would call it in
Venezuela? Regime change, even though
>> Well, what would you call it?
>> Madura's deputy is Well, as in that the
person who is supposedly in power in
Venezuela today is Madura's deputy.
>> Did you listen to the press conference
that that Trump did after where he says,
"We control the country now. We're
running the country now. I mean, how is
that not regime change? And we're taking
the oil. What's different about Iraq? I
mean, there are many differences, okay?
But but in terms of the justification or
what we could call the cover up in Iraq,
we we pretended there was a connection
between 9/11 and Iraq, there was kind of
a cover story. And in in Israel, there
there isn't one. We're taking over the
country to steal the oil. I mean, it's
all very blatant. Can I go back to
Iraq and to you making a film in 2004?
The the film that
you made about life in Iraq under US
occupation that led, I think, to you
discovering that you were under
surveillance yourself by the US
authorities, although I think it took
quite a long time for you to have the
official account of the extent of what
happened. So take us through it. What
started happening to you at the US
border after you had made that film?
>> So I made a film in in Iraq. Um I was
there for for eight months. I filmed I
filmed with an Iraqi family. I filmed um
I was filming the the elections under
occupation which I was you know which I
feel is a contradictory but that's what
I was doing. And then I was filming with
the UN private security contractors and
came back edited the film and once I
started showing the film at film
festivals is when I started being
detained and interrogated at US airports
and that was traveling both domestically
I was told I couldn't get a a boarding
pass um until I was questioned and it
happened internationally
and it started 2006 and It continued for
6 years and internationally I was
detained at least 50 times and
domestically maybe another 40 times. And
of course you don't get a letter that
you're on a terrorist watch list. Right.
They at at first I went to the lawyers
the ACLU. They tried to get answers. No
answers were forthcoming. I knew
somebody from Iraq and and they put me
in touch with somebody and just said you
are definitely on a list and you should,
you know, be careful. and it was a
terrorist watch list.
>> Just explain these these detentions, the
50 times it happened. I mean, this is
you're delayed boarding, but you're
eventually allowed onto a plane or you
miss planes and you can't get back to
the US or travel as you want to. It's
different different times. Um, sometimes
I would be um the first time it
happened, I was trans transiting in in
Vienna. There was a loudspeaker. I was I
was asked to report to security. All of
my my luggage was taken. I was put in a
van. I was taken to an X-ray area. Um,
everything was searched. I was
questioned by the head of security and
at at the airport in Vienna and and
ultimately and I was there going to a
film festival film festival in Sievo.
And and then I I said, "What are you
doing?" He said, "Well, you're on a
list." And I said, "I'm on a list whose
list." He said, "Your country's list."
And he said that we have a threat scale
from 1 to 400. And that I was at 400 on
their their threat scale. So that was
intimidating. and uh you know I kept
traveling. I I was twice told I I
couldn't board a plane. Um so I I wasn't
on the full no-fly list, but I was on a
terrorist watch list. And then [snorts]
at some point I in 2012
I decided to leave the United States to
work because I felt I couldn't work
safely
going through this border and I was I
was you know working on a film. So I
relocated to Berlin and that's um I was
there sort of in in exile for three
years um not working in the US. I mean
it's very sobering hearing you describe
it and I think you did in the end get an
acknowledgement from the the US
government over it.
>> But I do want to say that they didn't
volunteer to tell me that I was on a
terrorist watch list. I had to sue the
government which I did. The EFF, a great
organization, they represented me and we
sued uh for a foyer case. And so I have
I got back um about a thousand documents
of my FBI file heavily redacted. Um
there was a you know grand jury
subpoena. They
you know all of my emails, bank records,
etc. had been subpoenaed. So yeah, so
it's not it's I know I was on a list.
>> What was it like reading even redacted
reading that FBI file?
>> You know, I mean there was a part of me
that was a relief because it's just it's
validation, you know, and you see the
extent of it. I mean, they were sending
FBI agents to my film screenings and
they're writing up reports of what I
said at in conversation. So, it was it
was it was validating. I knew it was
happening. You know, I had the evidence,
but be because the government would
never acknowledge it. It was validating.
And as a filmmaker and as an artist, I
used it in my work. I hung it on museum
walls.
you know, because and I and I talk about
it a lot because, you know, usually the
people who are put in these list aren't
white women who've won, you know,
journalism awards and film awards, you
know,
>> Muslim men usually.
>> Yeah. Exactly. [snorts] Exactly. I think
it will help people understand what you
put into the film that you made about
Edward Snowden, Citizen 4, because like
he is the former CIA contractor who
revealed the extent of mass surveillance
by first coming to you. You were the
person that he reached out to. Tell us
about that. How did he first contact
you? What did he say? So Ed is in the
military, was in CIA, then he was at
NSA. That's when he became aware of the
extent of US military, you know, global
surveillance. He knew I was being
surveiled because I made a short film
about it about um some an NSA
mathematician and I was in Berlin
and I think he he he knew that I knew
about surveillance and that I knew how
dangerous it was and that I'd been
directly impacted and I also had a lot
of skills in terms of encryption um and
source protection because I had to, you
know, I had to, you know, But once
you're stopped at the airport a few
times and your computer, you know, and
your phone are taken away from you, you
learn, you know, you learn not to you
learn how to encrypt, you learn how to
protect things, you learn and I had, you
know, I had a lot of skills in terms of
dig um encryption technology. And um he
didn't reach out to me because I was a
filmmaker actually. He wasn't interested
in any way in me making a film. He saw
me as somebody who who would that he
could that I could protect him and
collaborate with news organizations to
break the story. So that was his
motivation. For many weeks when we were
communicating, he used an alias
throughout. He used the alias citizen or
citizen 4. It changed many times. I had
no idea dear who he was until right
before meeting him. But you did trust
Laura, did you? That he was genuine or
did you think this was some kind of ruse
or scam given what you were living
through at the time?
>> I had a spectrum of reactions. One was I
think it's legit and holy, you know, or
I don't know what I can say on your
podcast. I think this is this is legit.
We're in danger. A lot of danger. Then
there was another part of me was
it really could be an FBI enttrapment.
it, you know, because the FBI does do
that, so I better be careful in terms of
what I say, you know. Um, and at the
time I had been documenting Wikileaks
and Julian Assange, so I was like, I
think it's right. I think he's legit.
Could be a FBI or he could be a crazy,
you know, he could just be somebody who
doesn't know anything. So I basically
assumed that it was legit and went into
a very extreme mode of digital security.
At that point, we communicated through
encrypted email, but never would I log
into my home network. I had a separate
computer that was purchased with cash. I
would go to random, I was in Berlin at
the time, go to random, you know, cafes,
use the internet there. What Snowden
would call is you disassociate your
metadata or you divorce your metadata.
So your, you know, what's connected to
your phone is not connected to this
these communications. And we um but I
didn't know I mean for it took 5 months
and then I finally saw a document and
the documents were
staggering. I mean really staggering
>> and you ended up being part of putting
them out into the public domain working
with other journalists, meeting Snowden
himself for the first time.
>> Yeah. Of course, he then went on to get
asylum in Russia, a country that is far
from free where there is no real freedom
of expression. There is such an irony in
that.
>> Yeah. Well, I mean, it's as it's been
well reported, um he was actually on his
way to get to, I think, Ecuador. He had
gotten um an offer of asylum there and
he was in transit and the US revoked his
passport. So, he had a flight onward. I
mean, there are all the images of the
journalists who were going to go with
him. um there was a there was a leg from
from Moscow um to Cuba. So he was not
planning to um to seek asylum in in
Russia. Um but the US stranded him there
and once he was stranded there, he did
seek asylum. And the US also put I mean
the global pressure on all of its
European allies not to provide asylum
was profoundly intense because I was in
Germany. I know there was a lot of
support to give him asylum there. I mean
it was that kind of level of pressure.
So um he wasn't there by choice.
>> And are you still in touch with him?
>> I am. Yeah. Yeah. He's on the board of
um I'm on the board of the Freedom of
the Press Foundation which does press
freedom. We provide digital security
training for journalists. We have a
secure drop which is a system for um
sources to anonymously leak to
newspapers that has been sort of set up
in every major news organization um in
the US and and internationally. And so
yes, he's on the board and um his his
partner, you know, it's it's in the
film, but his partner um went to Russia
and they're they're together. So I'm
very happy he's not in a US prison. I I
can tell you that. Because had he been
arrested, I mean, we saw this with
I the reasons he ultimately agreed for
me to film him is because I convinced
him that he he needed to explain his
motivation
for exposing this information around
global mass surveillance because if he
didn't then the government was going to
create the narrative and you know and
the reason he did it is that he doesn't
want to live in a world where everything
is surveiled. you know, he he believes
that that the public should know the
extent of its um surveillance programs.
>> And there was such a huge outcry about
it at the time thanks to his work,
thanks to your work. And yet, look at
where we are today. In many ways,
haven't most of us normalized
surveillance because we're surrounded by
CCTV and facial recognition. Technology
has moved on so much and this is this is
reality and we assume we're being
surveiled all the time. I mean, I have a
few responses to that. One is I I don't
think that what that then what does that
mean? We shouldn't, you know, as
[clears throat] journalists inform the
public, and I know I know you're not
saying that, but I do think that there
are tools we can use. Like I am, as a as
a journalist, you might have Signal on
your phone, um, which is an encrypted
app. Okay. You use Signal. Did you use
Signal before you heard of Edward
Snowden's name?
>> You probably didn't.
>> No. Did it exist before that time? There
were technologies. Yeah. So, so I think
that there are ways in which we know the
dangers of these devices and yes of
course I mean surveillance is ubiquitous
and you know I think we need to people
should know their rights and there are
ways you can opt out like when you go to
the at least as a US citizen they want
to do the biometric scan I opt out
people don't know they can opt out of
those things you you there are certain
things you can opt out and and try to
harden your security but yes and of
course then you have also you know all
the tech companies that are surveilling
us But I don't I mean I but that's why
Laura I guess what I wonder about is
whether a lot of the things you care
about and I understand why you care
about them and they are really important
and your work has been incredibly
valuable but
>> isn't the battle lost on some of those.
I mean I don't know to what extent a
younger generation
would particularly care about their data
being used because they want the free
services that come with that. I think if
you're, you know, planning to uh to be
participate in a demonstration right now
in this country, I think you're going to
care about how to avoid being surveiled.
I mean, I think it really is if if
you're living in a regime of of
authoritarian regime, you know, about
how, you know, dangerous surveillance
is. I think that it really is a question
of where you if you perceive
um your government as a threat to you is
is go is the answer to that question.
And and um I mean, I'm on, you know,
activist groups have all kinds of ways
to um try to avoid being surveiled. I'm
not saying, you know, it's it's easy.
It's not easy. It's not easy for
journalists either, but um but we do I
believe we need to take these measures.
>> So come back to the wider context of the
present day then. Would you say that
cover up which has this long sweep of
history in it from Sih working on
Vietnam right up to him taking calls
from a source talking to him about Gaza?
Would would you say that this is about
the the film is about the present day as
much as it is about history?
>> Yeah, I mean I think it's very much
about the present day. I mean that's why
I mean that's compelled me to make it. I
mean, you know, I I I I could have made
other films, but I really feel this
urgency around, you know, the importance
of both investigative journalism about
the responsibilities of legacy media and
then also that drawing connections
across time, right? to draw connections
of cycles of impunity that that of in
this country and this country being the
United States that of these repetitions
and these repetitions like that it's
that there's there are these lies and
then there are no consequences which
then sets the stage for where we are
today. I think had we had had there been
consequences in in previous wrongdoings
and atrocities that had been that were
you ordered from the top of the
government I think we'd be in a
different moment. [clears throat]
But there were consequences, right? The
soldiers involved in the abuse at Abu
Gare or the outcry over Mili or the
freedom act that came in after the
evidence on mass surveillance in the US,
>> right? But consequences, I mean, I would
say that with in the case of Vietnam and
and and Iraq, I mean, the the the
soldiers were charged, but the chain of
command weren't. None of those people
ever faced any consequences. The people
who often face consequences are the the
whistleblowers. You have General Tuba
who wrote the report about torture at
Abu Grae. You know, he then is told that
he needs to, you know, step down, you
know, from the military. It's the it's
the it's the whistleblowers that face
the consequences. So, I think Nixon,
they impeach, but then he's pardoned or
he resigns before they impeach him and
then he's pardoned by Ford. [snorts] You
know, I think that cycle has to end. And
it's actually hard to think of a
president these days choosing to step
down in pretty much any circumstances,
>> right?
>> Feels like that age is gone.
>> Definitely.
>> Yeah. Hopefully not. You know, Sai says
it in the film. Given the stakes, we
can't just lay down and feel in despair.
You know, I mean, I I mean, I feel I
mean, the United States, we have press
freedom in our constitution. It's a
right. And so that we have to exercise
that right. And I feel that when you
know Sai talks about selfcensorship in
the film in the press in the US and like
that how distressing that is because we
have the right to be critical of the US
government. It's not illegal and we have
to maintain those rights and and and use
them well, you know, use them wisely.
>> And yet, Cover Up, your latest film is
going to be seen around the world in
households on mobile devices thanks to
it being on Netflix. And we're also in
an age where through phones in people's
hands.
We have evidence from many angles often
of the same incident.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean I I you know the
incidents that had happened the
cold-blooded killing of Renee Good where
she was doing the protected right of
assembly and protest is what was
happening there and we know what
happened to her because it was
documented by citizens say citizen
journalists. We also know George Floyd
was killed two miles from there and we
know that because of a citizen
journalist and and so yes I think those
phones are can also be forms of you know
that that um facts matter. you know, we
really do like and to have evidence of
these these crimes being committed. And
what's very scary to me right now,
particularly having gone through being
labeled a or whatever a terrorist
threat, is that the Trump administration
immediately after the cold-blooded
killing of a protester, you know, called
it, you know, domestic terrorism. And
that's that's terrifying, you know,
because I think this is that's playbook
authoritarianism where the rights that
people have are then are labeled as
national security threats, etc. enemies,
the enemy within, etc. It is a very
stark time and a difficult time for many
in which your film is coming out. But
your source of hope does it lie in
individual acts that you do see the acts
of individual citizens? Yeah, you know,
it's a dark time, but there there are
tipping points and things and we we have
to keep fighting and and sort of
fighting in terms of I mean, as a
journalist, you know, it means factf
finding and and doing it without fear or
favor and no matter what political party
it might anger, you know, I speak out a
lot against, you know, I think the
failure of the legacy media. I mean, I
think we need a media that is um that
that rebuilds trust with the public. You
know, I think they've lost a lot of
trust because they've I think often
withheld information from the public.
For instance, I don't think it was a
secret that, you know, Joseph Biden, you
know, wasn't fit to re, you know, run
for reelection. I mean, that should have
been in the news and all the news all
the time for the, you know, so we would
have had a better outcome than we have
now.
That's Laura Press speaking to me before
we had the news of Alex Prety's death on
the streets of Minneapolis. gunned down
by border patrol agents. He was 37, a US
citizen, and worked as an intensive care
nurse. And of course, it made me think
of what Laura Press had said about the
death of Renee Good about citizen
journalism because again, this moment
was captured on camera. And so, I went
back to her to talk again.
>> Laura, hello.
>> Hi. How are you?
>> I'm okay. Thank you for taking the time
to talk again. Obviously, I've been
thinking about you since the Alex Prey
news because of the way that you talked
about Renee Good in our first
conversation. Can I ask you then when
you heard the news of what happened to
Alex Prey, what was your immediate
reaction?
>> The immediate reaction, I mean, it's
horror, you know, and I think anyone who
sees this video, I mean, it's clear that
this was an execution. He was shot from
behind while being held down on the
ground. So it was horror and then and
then waiting for the government
narrative and then knowing that they
were going to lie about it. But like the
extent of the lie was actually quite
shocking of how they tried to distort
and create a narrative that did not
align in any way with the facts that we
could see with our eyes on these um
people who who documented his his
killing, his execution.
>> So how important then was the role of
video? Because again, this was something
you talked about when we first spoke in
relation to Renee Good and indeed George
Floyd before that,
>> right? I mean, going back to George
Floyd, I mean, these killings both of
Alex Prey and Renee Good were within
like one or two miles of where George
Floyd was killed. And we know about what
happened is because a citizen journalist
picked up their phone, a a teenager in
fact, Darnella Frasier, and she
documented his killing. And what the
police put out after they murdered
killed a man in broad daylight. They
said, you know, man dies in medical
incident, you know, like completely
false. Thankfully, there was somebody
there to document the murder of George
Floyd. And thankfully, citizens are
there documenting what ICE is doing
because these are executions. What we're
seeing, these are point blank
executions. You heard obviously the use
of the domestic terrorist label again,
the portrayal of Alex Prey as being
someone who had gone armed to a protest,
all of these kinds of characterizations.
What they're trying to do is create a
state of terror. This killing of people
using their protected rights of
demonstrating or um documenting ICE on
the street. I mean, this is these are
rights that we have in this country.
It's outrageous. It's also not a
surprise. It's kind of the playbook. And
so, we shouldn't be surprised, but we
should be prepared. And I think there's
an obligation on the press now not to
replicate false narratives when they
come from the government. The government
does lie. We know that over and over.
And what they're trying to do is, you
know, spin a narrative. And I think
journalists have an obligation to
challenge these narratives with facts
and not to not to repeat them.
>> Don't you believe in reflecting another
point of view in like what you see as
paring an authoritarian narrative others
might see as reflecting the official
position, which is also important to
understand what the administration is
doing or trying to do. Well, I mean, we
have evidence that you can see that this
person was not a threat, that he was on
the ground, that he was shot from
behind. So, no, I don't think you should
reflect something that's a lie that's
clearly a lie.
>> Do you think that this is a turning
point for ICE and for the perception of
the way that it's been operating? I
mean, particularly even if you see the
way President Trump is now talking about
needing to deescalate and wanting a full
investigation. Well, I mean, there are
many people, you know, in detention
right now, you know, under ice, people
are dying that we don't see, we don't
have cameras of. So, I'm not sure. I
mean, I think in terms of the
international reputation of the United
States. I mean, I think that is clearly
shifted. I think people look at what's
happening and they see they see these
are paramilitaries. These are masked
paramilitaries that are executing
protesters on the streets. I think, you
know, this is their policy. You know,
their policy is state terror. But I
wonder if you detect anything in
conversations that you're having with
people who might not previously have
supported the way that you have long
seen the exercise of US power. Are there
people, neighbors, relatives,
people who are further away from you
than friends who you think are changing
their minds because of what's happened
in the last few days?
>> I think that the videos that we see that
were taken by people that day are are
undeniable. And yeah, I I think anyone
seeing a person being shot from behind
is going to be outraged from that. And
yes, I do hope it does create a tipping
point. Whether or not that's going to
change the policies of this
administration, that that I'm much more
skeptical of. And for you, awful as
these moments are and the footage of
Alex Prey
has been seen around the world, does it
give you renewed sense of purpose, does
something like that sort of renew your
resolve to carry on doing the work you
do?
>> I do think people who stand up and and
resist to, you know, to to defend basic
rights. Yeah. I mean, I think we all
need to be doing that. I think we cannot
capitulate to sort of politics of
despair, you know, throw our hands up
and and not do anything. So, yeah.
>> But most people that truth be told
aren't resisting. And what's the impact
of that on you when you feel as strongly
as you do?
>> Well, I mean, you look at a community
like what's happening in Minneapolis,
there are people who don't identify as
activists who are coming together
because they're they're seeing kids
being kidnapped off the street. There is
kids, they have ICE masked agents going
into schools, you know, and [music]
kidnapping, abducting people and hunting
them. And I think people do stand up
when they're confronted with that. I
think we should all stand with the
people of Minneapolis and learn from
them and, you know, denounce ICE and
abolish it. It needs to be abolished. I
mean, this is a paramilitary force
that's we don't even know the names of
anyone who murdered, who executed Alex
Prey. Will we ever know those names?
There is something that's positive that
has happened since we last spoke and I
as you're with us again I just want to
take the opportunity to mark that as
well. You've had the news that coverup
has been nominated for a BAFTA.
Congratulations.
>> I appreciate that. You know the reason
it's meaningful is because I believe
Sai's body of work is meaningful and
what it asks us to do in terms of being
skeptical of government power over and
over which is what he does and which is
what we're trying to say in the film. So
yeah it's meaningful.
>> Is that what you think has led to the
nomination that that theme that life's
work is speaking to people right now
because of the moment?
>> Yeah I hope so that's what I would hope.
I mean that's why we made the film you
know because I think size body of work
teaches us so much about how we navigate
the present you know and and and the
role and the obligation of journalists
to be
dogged in and adversarial and
unrelenting in questioning state are
hey